---
title: "[5] Bubble nucleation in the surfactant stabilized polyol-CO2 mixtures: Insights from a classical density function theory study"
collection: talks
type: "Conference proceedings talk"
#excerpt: 'We present our findings on the polyelectrolyte-calcium binding energetics, comment on the preferential calcium binding sites on a polyelectrolyte backbone, and present a technique to calculate the calcium adsorption isotherm.'
permalink: /talks/2021-APS-5
venue: "American Physical Society March Meeting"
date: 2021-03-06
location: "Las Vegas, NV"
paperurl: 'https://ui.adsabs.harvard.edu/abs/2021APS..MARR04012M/abstract'
citation: 'Sriteja Mantha, Huikuan Chao, Andrew Ylitalo, Benjamin Laccetti, Thomas Fitzgibbons, Weijun Zhou, Valeriy Ginzburg, Richard Flagan, Julia Kornfield, and Zhen-Gang Wang. (20232). &quot;Bubble nucleation in the surfactant stabilized polyol-CO2 mixtures: Insights from a classical density function theory study.&quot; <i>APS March Meeting</i> (2022)'
---

Polyol based foams are widely sought-after materials for manufacturing thermal insulators, high resilience foam seating, adhesives, hard plastics for electronic instruments, etc. The polyol foams are produced by the reaction of di-isocyanate with polyol to form polyurethane and water. Some amount of isocyanate reacts with water to produce CO2. The generated CO2nucleates into bubbles within the polymer matrix, forming a foam. Silicone surfactants, made of poly dimethyl-siloxane backbone and polyether branches, are commonly used to stabilize the foam formulation. The silicone surfactants reduce interfacial tension between polyol-CO2interface, promotes bubble generation and impacts the foam cell size. It is also known that the composition of silicone surfactant significantly influences its role in stabilizing the foam formulation as well. However, the physical mechanism of how these silicone surfactants affect the nucleation and stability of the bubbles is not well understood. In this talk, using classical density functional theory models, we propose design principles for silicone surfactants and elucidate the mechanism through which they lead to foams with improved physical properties.

*This work was funded by the Dow Chemical Company