---
title: "[1] Structure of polyelectrolyte and multi-valent ion complexes"
collection: talks
type: "Conference proceedings talk"
#excerpt: 'We present our findings on the polyelectrolyte-calcium binding energetics, comment on the preferential calcium binding sites on a polyelectrolyte backbone, and present a technique to calculate the calcium adsorption isotherm.'
permalink: /talks/2023-APS-2
venue: "American Physical Society March Meeting"
date: 2023-03-06
location: "Las Vegas, NV"
paperurl: 'https://meetings.aps.org/Meeting/MAR23/Session/B15.2'
citation: 'Sriteja Mantha, Alec Glisman, Zhen-Gang Wang, Decai Yu, Thomas Kalantar, Christopher Tucker, Eric Wasserman, Scott Backer, Larisa Reyes, and Dipti Singh. (2023). &quot;Structure of polyelectrolyte and multi-valent ion complexes.&quot; <i>APS March Meeting</i> (2023)'
---

Experiments have established the ability of aqueous polyelectrolytes to passivate and delay the crystallization of limescale (CaCO3).
Polyelectrolytes are expected to influence the CaCO3 crystallization by chelating Ca2+ ions from the solution and modifying the crystal growth by preferentially adsorbing to certain crystal surfaces.
These processes may potentially delay the onset of nucleation and crystal growth, respectively.
However, the mechanism through which polyelectrolytes operate is currently unknown.
The binding of a Ca2+ to a charged residue on the polymer backbone is strongly dependent on the charge state of a polymer and its conformation, which are affected by the pH, concentration of Ca2+, and the overall ionic strength of the solution.
The ability of a polyelectrolyte to sequester free Ca2+ depends on the polyelectrolyte-Ca2+ binding energy.
We conduct molecular dynamics simulations with enhanced sampling techniques to study the interaction of Ca2+ with various polyanions in an aqueous suspension.
We will present our findings on the polyelectrolyte-Ca2+ binding energetics, comment on the preferential Ca2+ binding sites on a polyelectrolyte backbone, and discuss their impact on the backbone conformations.

*This work was funded by the Dow Chemical Company